Threat to Oilseed Rape The Cabbage Stem Flea Beetle (Psylliodes chrysocephala, CSFB) has become one of the biggest threats to winter oilseed rape (Brassica napus, WOSR), the crop behind those bright yellow fields you see each spring. CSFB may seem a peculiar name, but WOSR in fact belongs to the cabbage (Brassica) family.  WOSR is one of the most widely grown crops across Northern Europe known for its bright yellow flowers and for producing rapeseed oil, the UKÕs most popular cooking oil, accounting for 40% of total edible oil in the UK. Additionally, rapeseed oil is staple in many foods from mayonnaise to crisps to bread, and livestock feed.Consequently, CSFB are found across northern Europe and North America. Warming temperatures has increased the potential range of CSFB, facilitating their northward migration in the UK.Purple areas show the highest CSFB larvae populations. CSFB populations predominant in the South, but are spreading northward, with Yorkshire seeing a sharp increase in 2025. Data collected from UK-wide surveys counting the number of CSFB larvae per WOSR plant, with more than 10 larvae per stem representing a hotspotFailing management strategies CSFB were previously managed using neonicotinoid insecticides; however, the European Union banned this type of insecticides in 2013 due to their off-target effects on important pollinators. Since then, farmers have turned to using pyrethroid insecticides, although, resistance is becoming widespread among CSFB populations with a mean resistance of 56% amongst populations in the UK but some of 100% resistance. This resistance is two-fold from knockdown resistance mutations and metabolic-based resistance, thus rendering pyrethroid insecticides ineffective. Therefore, there is currently no effective management strategy against CSFB, resulting in higher number of CSFB across the UK. Definition and reason for banning. Insecticide - compounds used to manage and deter insect pest populations that affect food productionReason - negative effects on wild bee populations, specifically reducing the growth and reproduction of colonies (Rundlšf et al., 2015). Neonicotinoid pesticides influence also extends to birds, with research demonstrating that birds consumingneonicotinoids either directly through treated seed or indirectly via insects show reduced migration ability (Eng et al., 2017) and significant weight loss (Hallmann et al., 2014). These pesticides are even more problematic due to high levels of persistence in soils and leaching into water systems, thus spreading to other environmentsImpact of CSFB on WOSR and beyond Without an effective management strategy WOSR yields have substantially reduced due to damage from CSFB, average UK yields have decreased by 0.63t/ha since 2014. To avoid the costs of failed WOSR crops many farms have turned to other crops, with a reduction in UK land growing WOSR crops by 35% in the UK, from 2012 to 2019.The decline in OSR yield caused by CSFB has many widespread impacts:* Economic* Social * Environmental * Agricultural Economic:* CSFB are responsible for approximately £120 million annual losses in the UK, with estimated annual costs of £5 million to the North-East agricultural industry, alone. * For consumers this means higher prices, with 18.2% higher vegetable oil prices in 18.2% in 2025 compared to 2024. Since OSR is a key component of many food products and a major livestock feed, this has a ripple effect through our food system. * This substantially impacts UK trade, transforming it from the 5th biggest OSR exporter in the 2010s to producing only 13% of domestic needs and one of the biggest importers. This costs the UK an estimated £1 billion annually since OSR is the only commercially viable oil crop in the UK, threatening food securitywebsiteSocial * The CSFB-induced increase in consumer prices further isolates underserved communities as the cost-of-living rises. * Not only do decreased and unpredictable yields cause financial stress for consumers it reduces the profits of farmers. Beyond economics, this fuels the mental health crisis as financial insecurity causes pressure. Environmental* OSR flowers in early spring, when few other crops are, providing a major food source for bees and other pollinators. With 35% less OSR being grown, there is less food for pollinators during a critical period, thereby reducing pollinator population sizes. This has cascading ecosystem effects from reduced pollination to decreased biodiversity.  * Without an effective solution, farmers are pushed toward increased pesticide use, which negatively impacts the environment for many years, due to the non-biodegradable nature of many chemical pesticides. * Furthermore, there are many environmental consequences chemical pesticides (expanding).Agricultural OSR plays a crucial role in promoting sustainable and diverse farming, through: * Breaking pest and disease cycles in cereal rotations * Improving soil structure for subsequent crops * Boosting yield of subsequent wheat cropsTherefore, without OSR crops farming practices become less sustainable with increased fertiliser use and less diverse cropping patterns that influence insect/pollinator populations. Also, the yield of other crops will likely decrease consequently.What's Next?With no effective pesticide solution, increasing CSFB resistance and populations spreading northward, alternative environmentally friendly solutions are needed to prevent more farmland shifts away from this crucial crop.